Add documentation about covariant coordinate changes (#202)
gyselax/gyselalibxx: docs/mathematical_and_physical_conventions.md

### Curvilinear to Cartesian

> The *Jacobian* matrix $`J`$ associated with the transformation from the curvilinear coordinates $`\{q^i\}`$ to the Cartesian coordinates $`\{x^i\}`$ is defined from its components $`J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.`$ on the basis $`e_i \otimes b^j`$ as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Jacobian* matrix $`J`$ associated with the transformation from the curvilinear coordinates $`\{q^i\}`$ to the Cartesian coordinates $`\{x^i\}`$ is defined from its components $`J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.`$ on the basis $`\mathbf{e}_i \otimes \mathbf{b}^j`$ as:
```

```math
J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right. = \frac{\partial x^i}{\partial q^j},
```

> while the inverse Jacobian $`J^{-1}`$ is defined by its components $`J^{-1}\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.`$ on the basis $`b_j \otimes e_i`$ as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while the inverse Jacobian $`J^{-1}`$ is defined by its components $`J^{-1}\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.`$ on the basis $`\mathbf{b}_j \otimes \mathbf{e}_i`$ as
```

J^{-1}\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right. = \frac{\partial q^i}{\partial x^j}.
```

> It is important to note that the Jacobian matrix and its inverse are not usually expressed in the same basis. The Jacobian of a function $f : \{q^j\} \rightarrow \{x^i\}$ is defined on the basis:
> 
> ```math
> e_i \otimes b^j
> ```
> while the inverse, being equivalent to the Jacobian of a function $f : \{x^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}$ is defined on the basis:
> 
> ```math
> b_j \otimes e_i
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jacobian $`J`$ can be understood as a tensor expressed on the basis $`\mathbf{e}_i \otimes \mathbf{b}^j`$, where $` \otimes`$ is the tensor product operator. That is to say

```math
J = J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.  \mathbf{e}_i \otimes \mathbf{b}^j
```

It is important to note that the Jacobian tensor and its inverse are not expressed in the same basis. Indeed, the inverse Jacobian of the transformation $`\{q^i\} \rightarrow \{x^j\}`$ is equivalent to the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{x^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}`$. As such, the inverse Jacobian can be expressed using the basis $`\mathbf{b}_i \otimes \mathbf{e}_j`$ as 

```math
J^{-1} = J^{-1} \left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.  \mathbf{b}_i \otimes \mathbf{e}_j
```

Where we used the fact that since $`\{\mathbf{e}_i\}`$ is a Cartesian basis one can write $`\mathbf{e}^i = \mathbf{e}_i `$

```

Author: I have made several changes related to our discussion and this suggestion, however I have not made them here

A^i_\text{c} = J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right. g^{jk}A_k. 
```

however a simplification can be made using the fact that $G=J^TJ$, thus $G^{-1}=J^{-1}J^{-T}$ (where $J^{-T}$ represents the transpose of the inverse of the Jacobian) and $JG^{-1} = JJ^{-1}J^{-T} = J^{-T}$. Thus the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the covariant basis $`\{\mathbf{b}^i\}`$ can be related to the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}_c`$ expressed in the Cartesian basis as:

```math
A^i_\text{c} = {A_i}_\text{c} = (J^{-T})_i^{\;j} A_j = (J^{-1})^j_{\;i} A_j
```

Note that in the above expression the $`J^{-T}`$ tensor has been expressed in the $`\mathbf{e}_i \otimes \mathbf{b}_j`$ basis.

### Curvilinear to curvilinear

Let us now consider the more general case where one seeks to relate two curvilinear coordinate systems $`\{q^i\}`$ and $`\{p^i\}`$. Let us also write $`\{\mathbf{b}_i\}`$ (resp. $`\{\mathbf{b}^i\}`$) the contravariant (resp. covariant) vector basis associated with coordinates $`\{q^i\}`$, and $`\{\mathbf{c}_i\}`$ (resp. $`\{\mathbf{c}^i\}`$) the contravariant (resp. covariant) vector basis associated with coordinates $`\{p^i\}`$.

> We denote by $`J\{q\to p\}`$ the Jacobian of the transformation from the coordinate system $`\{q^i\}`$ to $`\{p^i\}`$. The components of the Jacobian on the basis $`c_i \otimes b^j`$ and the components of its inverse on the basis $`b_i \otimes c^j`$ are defined similarly to above, as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We denote by $`J_{\{q\to p\}}`$ the Jacobian of the transformation from the coordinate system $`\{q^i\}`$ to $`\{p^i\}`$. The components of the Jacobian on the basis $`\mathbf{c}_i \otimes \mathbf{b}^j`$ and the components of its inverse on the basis $`\mathbf{b}_i \otimes \mathbf{c}^j`$ are defined similarly to above, as:
```

A^i_\text{c} = J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right. g^{jk}A_k. 
```

> however a simplification can be made using the fact that $G=J^TJ$, thus $G^{-1}=J^{-1}J^{-T}$ (where $J^{-T}$ represents the transpose of the inverse of the Jacobian) and $JG^{-1} = JJ^{-1}J^{-T} = J^{-T}$. Finally the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the covariant basis can be related to the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}_c`$ expressed in the covariant basis as:
> ```math
> A^i_\text{c} = {A_i}_\text{c} = (J^{-T})_i^{\;j} A_j = (J^{-1})^j_{\;i} A_j

Reviewer: ```suggestion
however a simplification can be made using the fact that $G=J^TJ$, thus $G^{-1}=J^{-1}J^{-T}$ (where $J^{-T}$ represents the transpose of the inverse of the Jacobian) and $JG^{-1} = JJ^{-1}J^{-T} = J^{-T}$. Thus the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the covariant basis $`\{\mathbf{b}^i\}`$ can be related to the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}_c`$ expressed in the Cartesian basis as:
```math
A^i_\text{c} = {A_i}_\text{c} = (J^{-T})_i^{\;j} A_j = (J^{-1})^j_{\;i} A_j
```

Note that in the above expression the $`J^{-T}`$ tensor has been expressed in the $`\mathbf{e}_i \otimes \mathbf{b}_j`$ basis.

Author: Done fea23b9e6

### Curvilinear to Cartesian

The *Jacobian* matrix $`J`$ associated with the transformation from the curvilinear coordinates $`\{q^i\}`$ to the Cartesian coordinates $`\{x^i\}`$ is defined from its components $`J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.`$ on the basis $`\mathbf{e}_i \otimes \mathbf{b}^j`$ as:

```math
J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right. = \frac{\partial x^i}{\partial q^j},
```

while the inverse Jacobian $`J^{-1}`$ is defined by its components $`J^{-1}\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right.`$ on the basis $`\mathbf{b}_j \otimes \mathbf{e}_i`$ as

```math
J^{-1}\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right. = \frac{\partial q^i}{\partial x^j}.
```

> Note that the Jacobian matrix and its inverse are not expressed in the same basis. Indeed, the inverse Jacobian of the transformation $`\{q^i\} \rightarrow \{x^j\}`$ is equivalent to the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{x^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}`$. As such it uses the basis on which the Jacobain of the transformation $`\{x^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}`$ would usually be expressed (here we used the fact that since $`\{\mathbf{e}_i\}`$ is a Cartesian basis one can write $`\mathbf{e}^i = \mathbf{e}_i `$).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown above, the Jacobian matrix and its inverse are not expressed in the same basis. Indeed, the inverse Jacobian of the transformation $`\{q^i\} \rightarrow \{x^j\}`$ is equivalent to the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{x^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}`$. As such it uses the basis on which the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{x^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}`$ would usually be expressed.
```

A^i_\text{c} = J\left.^{i}_{\;j}\right. g^{jk}A_k. 
```

> however a simplification can be made using the fact that $G=J^TJ$, thus $G^{-1}=J^{-1}J^{-T}$ (where $J^{-T}$ represents the transpose of the inverse of the Jacobian) and $JG^{-1} = JJ^{-1}J^{-T} = J^{-T}$. Thus the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the covariant basis $`\{\mathbf{b}^i\}`$ can be related to the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}_c`$ expressed in the Cartesian basis as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
however a simplification can be made using the fact that $G=J^TJ$, thus $G^{-1}=J^{-1}J^{-T}$ (where $J^{-T}$ represents the transpose of the inverse of the Jacobian) and $JG^{-1} = JJ^{-1}J^{-T} = J^{-T}$. Thus the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the covariant basis $`\{\mathbf{b}^i\}`$ can be related to the components of the vector $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the Cartesian basis as:
```

```math
\mathbf{A} = A^i_{\{p\}} \mathbf{b}_i = A_{\{p\}i} \mathbf{b}^i = A^i_{\{q\}} \mathbf{c}_i = A_{\{q\}i} \mathbf{c}^i, 
```

where $`A^i_{\{p\}}`$ (resp. $`A_{\{p\}i}`$) refers to the $`i`$-th contravariant (resp. covariant) component of $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the vector basis associated with coordinates $`\{p^i\}`$, and similarly $`A^i_{\{q\}}`$ (resp. $`A_{\{q\}i}`$) refers to the $`i`$-th contravariant (resp. covariant) component of $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the vector basis associated with coordinates $`\{q^i\}`$. We have

```math
A^i_{\{p\}} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{i}_{\;j} A^j_{\{q\}}.
```

By introducing the metric tensors $`G_{\{p\}}`$  and $`G_{\{q\}}`$ associated with both curvilinear coordinates system, and by writing $`g_{\{p\}ij}`$ and $`g_{\{q\}ij}`$ their elements ($`g^{ij}_{\{p\}}`$ and $`g^{ij}_{\{q\}}`$ the elements of their inverse) one relates the components of $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the covariant vector bases associated with both curvilinear coordinates system as:

```math
g^{ik}_{\{p\}}A_{\{p\}k} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{i}_{\;j}g^{jl}_{\{q\}} A_{\{q\}l}.
```

> The metric tensor associated with the basis $`c_i`$ can be obtained from the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{q^i\} \rightarrow \{p^j\}`$ and the metric tensor associated with the basis $`b_j`$ via the following equation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metric tensor associated with the basis $`\mathbf{c}_i`$ can be obtained from the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{q^i\} \rightarrow \{p^j\}`$ and the metric tensor associated with the basis $`b_j`$ via the following equation:
```

```math

> g_{il}\{p\} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^T\left._{i}^{\;j}\right. g_{\{q\}jk} (J_{\{q\to p\}})\left.^{k}_{\;l}\right. = (J_{\{p\to q\}})\left.^{j}_{\;i}\right. g_{\{q\}jk} (J_{\{p\to q\}})\left.^{k}_{\;l}\right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
g_{{il}\{p\}} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^T\left._{i}^{\;j}\right. g_{\{q\}jk} (J_{\{q\to p\}})\left.^{k}_{\;\;l}\right. = (J_{\{p\to q\}})\left.^{j}_{\;\;i}\right. g_{\{q\}jk} (J_{\{p\to q\}})\left.^{k}_{\;\;l}\right.
```

```

> The metric tensor associated with the basis $`b_i`$ can be obtained from the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{p^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}`$ and the metric tensor associated with the basis $`c_j`$ via the following equation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metric tensor associated with the basis $`\mathbf{b}_i`$ can be obtained from the Jacobian of the transformation $`\{p^i\} \rightarrow \{q^j\}`$ and the metric tensor associated with the basis $`\mathbf{c}_j`$ via the following equation:
```

```math

> g_{il}\{q\} = (J_{\{p\to q\}})^T\left._{i}^{\;j}\right. g_{\{p\}jk} (J_{\{p\to q\}})\left.^{k}_{\;l}\right. = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-1}\left.^{j}_{\;i}\right. g_{\{p\}jk} (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-T}\left.^{k}_{\;l}\right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
g_{il}\{q\} = (J_{\{p\to q\}})^T\left._{i}^{\;j}\right. g_{\{p\}jk} (J_{\{p\to q\}})\left.^{k}_{\;\;l}\right. = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-1}\left.^{j}_{\;\;i}\right. g_{\{p\}jk} (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-T}\left.^{k}_{\;\;l}\right.
```

```

These expressions can be used to relates the components of $`\mathbf{A}`$ expressed in the covariant vector bases associated with both curvilinear coordinates system in another way. Using the above expressions we can see that $`J_{\{q\to p\}}G_{\{q\}}^{-1}=G_{\{p\}}^{-1}J_{\{q\to p\}}^{-T}`$. This gives us:

```math

> A_{\{p\}i} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-T}\left._{\;i}^j\right. A_{\{q\}j} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-1}\left.^j_{\;i}\right.A_{\{q\}j} = (J_{\{p\to q\}})^j_{\;i} A_{\{q\}j}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A_{\{p\}i} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-T}\left._{\;\;i}^j\right. A_{\{q\}j} = (J_{\{q\to p\}})^{-1}\left.^j_{\;\;i}\right.A_{\{q\}j} = (J_{\{p\to q\}})^j_{\;\;i} A_{\{q\}j}.
```
